The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia and the competing visions of Lauchlin Currie (1902-93) andAlbert Hirschman (1915-2012) Roger J Sandilands* Introduction As recounted in detail in Michele Alacevich’s The Political Economy of the World Bank: The Early Years, Lauchlin Currie was chosen in 1949 to direct the first of the World Bank’s comprehensive survey missions – to Colombia (Alacevich 2009; see also the biography of Currie in Sandilands 1990). After his Report was submitted, Currie returned to Colombiato advise on the implementation of his own recommendations. These included the setting up of a national planning board. In 1952 Albert Hirschman (1915-2012) was hired by Colombia’s central bank as an adviser to this board, with strong links to the World Bank. This article outlines the competing early visions of Currie and Hirschman on the economics of development, their conflicting advice to the government of Colombia, the ways in which they influenced the Bank’s early operations, and their subsequent broader thinking on economic development theory and policy. It draws partly on my review of Jeremy Adelman’s coverage of this period in his magisterial biography of Hirschman (Adelman 2013; Sandilands 2015). It also comments on William Easterly’s treatment of the same period in a chapter on Currie and Hirschman in which Easterly caustically views them – especially Currie – as part of a “tyranny of experts”, aided and abetted by the World Bank (Easterly 2013). This paper may also be seen as a case study of the uses of new archival research (with access to unpublished papers), in reassessing the history of important debates in economic analysis and policy, and it complements and adds to Sandilands (2009) in this regard. * Emeritus Professor of Economics at the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow. Email: r.j.sandilands@ strath.ac.uk. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia 1. Currie’s World Bank Mission to Colombia and its Aftermath Lauchlin Currie, a native of Canada, was eminently suited to his role as mission leader. He had studied and taught at Harvard from 1925-34 before entering the US government as one of Jacob Viner’s “Freshman Brain Trusters” in the Treasury to advise on reform of the Federal Reserve System. This led to his appointment as personal adviser to Fed Chairman Marriner Eccles, 1934-39, and then as administrative assistant to President Franklin D Roosevelt in the White House, 1939-45. He was Director of the Foreign Economic Administration, 1943-44, and an emissary to China in 1941 and 1942 (where he had discussions with both Chiang Kai-shek and Chou En-lai) and to Switzerland, France and England in early 1945. After FDR’s death, he left government to set up a private consultancy. This led to his World Bank contract in 1949. His 1949 mission team included 14 foreign experts (with 16 Colombian advisers) in the main economic and social fields (public finance was notably covered by Richard Musgrave). The team worked in Colombia from July-November 1949 and the Report was presented to the Colombian government the following July (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development [World Bank], 1950). The stress was on the internal consistency of quantitative and qualitative targets and priorities. The Colombian government then contracted Currie for three different but overlapping tasks. First, to serve as adviser to a bi-partisan Comité de Desarrollo Económico (CDE) set up to examine his own Report’s recommendations (for which he, rather than the Bank, took responsibility) and advise on policy. Second, to direct a full-scale Public Administration Mission whose recommendations on reform could help implement the Comité’s policy advice. Finally, to coordinate President Harry Truman’s “Point Four” Program and a United Nations Technical Assistance Program for Colombia. It was hoped that the assistance and foreign loans would be consistent with and give leverage to the priorities established by the Comité. 2. Albert Hirschman in Colombia In early 1952 the Comité established the Consejo Nacional de Planificación (National Planning Council) directed by Emilio Toro who had earlier been an executive director of the World Bank. The Bank recommended Hirschman as an adviser to this new body1. He made his first visit to Colombia in March for two weeks. After signing a two-year contract with the Colombian government (in collaboration with the World Bank) he returned in May via Buenaventura on Colombia’s Pacific coast 1 Jeremy Adelman’s (2013) biography recounts the young Hirschman’s escape from Nazi Germany in April 1933 to his arrival in the United States in January 1941 with a fellowship at Berkeley, followed by wartime service in the US Army from February 1944 as an interpreter in Italy and at the Nuremberg war crimes trials. He then entered US government service with the Fed in Washington until April 1952 when he resigned to take up his advisory post in Colombia. from where he travelled overland to Bogotá, arriving some days later to join the Council. The World Bank’s formal representative on the Council was Jacques Torfs, a Belgian economist already on the Bank’s staff. Meanwhile, Currie was already working informally with the Council (and formally from July) as an adviser despite the misgivings of the World Bank whose officials feared, rightly as it turned out, that Currie would offer advice in conflict with that of ‘their’ top man, Hirschman. To begin with, Adelman notes how in 1950 the Colombian government persuaded Currie to return to advise on the implementation of his own Report with its overall development programme designed to break (with World Bank loan support) what Currie diagnosed as the vicious circles of underdevelopment. Adelman, however, describes Currie’s Report as “lifeless”, with too many statistics (as opposed to Hirschman’s famous bon mots and aphorisms), and follows Hirschman in criticising (ironically, in tune with Easterly’s book) the arrogance of foreign “experts” who – supposedly unlike Hirschman himself – are said to talk down to the locals and ignore their advice. He also claims (erroneously) that Currie neglected the private sector in favour of the state. Easterly (2013: 120-21) misrepresents Currie even more on this score. For Easterly, the 1944 Bretton Woods conference (whose driving force was Currie’s close friend Harry Dexter White2) was “the original sin” that sent “authoritarian technocrats” like Currie to Colombia to advise corrupt fascist governments with little interest in democracy. They supposedly treat the countries they visit as “blank slates”, thus ignoring and perpetuating their history of imperialist oppression; and they offer grandiose plans for the development of “the nation” instead of relying on individuals who know their own interests best and who can be relied upon to find spontaneous solutions to their own problems if only the state would stop interfering except to give voice to the poor. However, Easterly (2013: 120-21, 346), praises Hirschman for siding more than most with democracy and the poor. Also, Hirschman was more focused on individual projects, especially in the private sector, while Currie’s focus was more on macroeconomic plans. But Easterly particularly lauds Friedrich Hayek as the great upholder 2 White and Currie were fellow PhD students at Harvard and held similar top posts in the 1930s Roosevelt administrations, at the US Treasury and Fed, respectively. They both suffered from McCarthyite allegations during the Cold War (see Boughton and Sandilands 2003). Hirschman was also affected, though to a much less degree. Adelman (2013: 2) claimed that Hirschman’s “record of political activism tainted him with enough suspicion that he was forced to decamp [to South America] … in the heat of the McCarthy purges”. However, neither Currie nor Hirschman were in exile there, having both gone voluntarily to Colombia for satisfying work. Both were able to return freely to the United States, though Currie was under a darker cloud than Hirschman. Some have wondered whether this affected the World Bank’s support for Currie after Hirschman came to Colombia in 1952. This is possible, but Currie was already under a well-publicised cloud in 1949 and yet the World Bank happily selected him then. Hirschman left Colombia in 1956 after four years, while Currie lived and worked there for the next 40 years apart from five years in the USA, Canada and Britain, 1966-71. (In 1961 he even had a luncheon in the White House with Walt Rostow, at that time President Kennedy’s National Security Adviser, to discuss an economic plan for Colombia). R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia of the decentralist faith, while condemning Gunner Myrdal as the archetypal centraliser. There is little room in between, and special scorn is reserved for the likes of Paul Rosenstein-Rodan’s call for a Big Push or Currie’s “technocratic” World Bank Report for a comprehensive development plan designed to break interrelated vicious circles of poverty and raise the general standard of living3. Currie and Hirschman were at loggerheads from the start. Involved was an element of jealousy as well as, on Hirschman’s part, insecurity arising from Currie’s far greater initial knowledge and experience of Colombia (and elsewhere). But the conflict involved deep disagreements on program versus project loans, “social” versus “directly productive” projects, and advice on monetary policy (Currie’s special area of expertise: see Laidler 1993; 1999). This disagreement – as well as their personality clashes – are fully documented in Alacevich (2009) who gives a more balanced account than Adelman of the respective strengths and weaknesses of the two protagonists’ theoretical approaches and policy effectiveness. We shall see that Adelman downplays Colombian and World Bank criticisms of Hirschman’s advice and personality. Robert Garner, the Bank’s vice-president, wrote to Emilio Toro on May 13, 1952, about Toro’s desire to hire other advisers to the Consejo: “… We feel strongly that there should only be one ‘Economic Adviser’ to the Board [Hirschman] and that the other economists employed by the Board should work under his direction and supervision”4. As Alacevich noted (2009: 53-55), Toro still hoped the Bank would agree to have Currie advise on matters of public administration, “for no amount of planning will be effective if there is not the apropiate [sic] administrative machinery to carry it on; that is a truism”. On May 27, Garner replied urging Toro not to hire Currie, despite “his broad experience and obvious intellectual qualities” because “he was not a leading expert in the field of public administration” and (more to the point) he might “embarrass Hirschman”. However, Alacevich did not mention that Garner then left the door open in a postscript: that “the considerations I have mentioned would not necessarily apply to the appointment of Currie as a special consultant to the Board on some particular aspect of your problems”. As soon as Currie was free of other commitments, in August, Toro went ahead and retained him formally as an adviser. As Garner predicted, Toro would then seek Currie’s advice on a broad range of problems, creating the “resistances” Garner feared. It was Currie’s view that these were inevitable if anything worthwhile was to be accomplished. Within days of Currie joining the Consejo, Hirschman wrote an anguished letter (Au3 Currie would later develop these ideas in Operación Colombia (1961); in a related “breakthrough plan” in Accelerating Development (1966); and in his Plan of the Four Strategies (1972), officially adopted as Colombia’s national plan for 1972-74. These plans all focused on accelerated rural-urban migration, helped by measures to stimulate savings directed to urban housing and infrastructure and by exchange rate policies that expanded non-traditional exports. 4 All of the World Bank correspondence cited in this article is archived and publicly available in the World Bank’s library, Washington D.C. gust 23) to Richard Demuth at the Bank. He alluded to Garner’s May 13 letter to Toro, confirming those fears. 3. The protagonists’ early tensions, and clearing up some history Both Alacevich (2009: 56-57) and Adelman (2013: 302) cite parts of another letter from Hirschman, this time to Burke Knapp of the Bank, September 20, 1952: … This is the second letter I am writing you in three days. I am very happy not to have to send you the first one which dealt in some detail with the unpleasantness which had arisen here in connection with Currie’s participation in the work of the Planning Council. At the end of that letter, I told you that I was still confident that I could handle the situation myself, but added that I would not mind a little help from the Bank. As events turned out, Currie took it upon himself to resolve everything by committing one of those blunders which are not forgiven here... Looking back on it now, the whole episode reminds one of Napoleon’s Hundred Days, with the fortunate difference that Currie’s comeback lasted about half as long! As it happens, Currie lasted much longer than Hirschman expected. In an extract from this same letter but not cited by Alacevich or Adelman, Hirschman wrote that he had been “given news” from Council member Rafael Delgado Barreneche (but not from Council chairman Emilio Toro who was abroad at that time) of Currie’s “definitive removal from the Council’s staff”. Later in this letter, Hirschman wrote that “Toro has never accepted the terms of [Garner’s May 13] letter, partly because of a probably unconscious desire for built-in conflict”. And, further on: “Now that Currie is out, Toro would like to reproduce the same situation in some other way”. Hirschman was trying to stop Toro from appointing anyone else who could be a threat to Hirschman’s full authority as top economist. But he was mistaken in thinking that Currie was “out”, for whatever Currie’s “blunder” may have been, the fuss apparently blew over within a few days. This at least is what one may glean from Currie’s unpublished record of his own participation in the work of both the Comité and Consejo in 1950-535. Here are two other extracts from Hirschman’s letter of September 20 that Alacevich does cite: … I am convinced that our Colombian friends do not mind very much if the possibility of conflict is built into the staff organization of the Council. They just love to play one foreign expert out against the other: […] it permits them to make their bow to foreign expert opinion and at the same time provides them with an alibi for doing exactly what they want. 5 All the citations in this article to Currie’s unpublished memoranda on this period (and previously unseen by Michele Alacevich) refer to papers currently in Bogotá that are still being catalogued by Dr Elba Cánfora for inclusion in the Lauchlin Currie Papers at Duke University’s archival library. See http://library.duke.edu/rubenstein/findingaids/currie/. I am grateful to Dr Cánfora for making these papers available to me in Bogotá. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia And: I did not give up my Federal Reserve position to advise on the raising or lowering of reserve requirements in Colombia. Since I have no intention to set myself up here as a purely monetary expert and to examine projects only from the point of view of their compatibility with monetary stability, the proposed staffing pattern has even less chance to result in good working relations than might otherwise be the case. For his part, Currie (1981: 180), in a chapter that discusses the organisational framework for advising on development plans, had a much more positive opinion of the confrontations inside the Consejo, and of the relative effectiveness of its small, three-man planning council, advised by Hirschman and himself, and having the confidence of the president and direct access to him. So, despite or because of the conflicts within the Consejo, “the discussions on short policy memoranda were vigorous and probing, preparing the members of the committee for their meetings with the president”. It helps explain his dispute with Hirschman over administrative reforms – specifically on why he preferred that the Budget Bureau be located within the Office of the President, as in the United States from 1939 (recall that Currie himself had an office inside the White House, 1939-45), with remarks also on the place of the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers, formed in 1946. But Currie’s notes on the 1952-53 history illustrate in more personal detail the nature of the mutual animosity between Currie and Hirschman, and give a more rounded picture. For example, on September 4, 1952, Currie recorded: While I was preparing for the Mission to Caldas in May this year, the Consejo Nacional de Planificación was created. Dr Toro was most anxious that I serve as Asesor to the Consejo and, in the latter part of May had me prepare several memoranda on monetary policy and control… In the meantime, however, the Bank had nominated Al Hirschman as chief economist of the Consejo and a two year contract had been concluded. … [Toro] had been ill for a month and [at the end of July] he felt that the Consejo had been drifting badly. He was most anxious I become associated with the work and create the rhythm we had in the Comité de Desarrollo Económico. He said he had taken the matter up with [Robert] Garner at the World Bank and Garner said that, of course, it was up to the Consejo but that he feared there would be difficulties between Currie and Hirschman as Currie seemed to create resistencias [sic]. Toro said that although he was telling me this, he would not want it to create a complex but that he wanted me as before to make as many criticisms or recommendations as I felt the situation warranted. It was explained to Hirschman that I would handle primarily public administration matters and that I would attend as many of the meetings of the Consejo as I liked, although I was not obligated to attend every one… I started work with the Consejo on August 12, and, in two days, presented the long memorandum on the work and program of the Consejo and the list of personnel needed. This gave rise to the first conflict with Hirschman. He had prepared a memorandum agreeing the Bank’s suggestion that we needed two economists, one to work in national accounts and one in investment projects. This came from [Richard] Demuth but I assume it was written by Torfs. In the Consejo, in place of the junior economist statistician I specified, Hirschman argued for an economist skilled in the technics of various industrial projects. The Consejo ruled this out and I compromised with Hirschman on a general economist. The following day, I discussed with Hirschman the desirability of avoiding disagreements in the Consejo and suggested that it was a wise precaution to read each other’s memoranda before they were submitted. Currie’s next entry was dated September 16 and is clearly relevant to Hirschman’s letter of the 20th to Burke Knapp above. It reads: Hirschman and I next got tangled up in monetary policy. I found that almost the first thing he did on his arrival was to criticise my scheme for rediscount quotas. He brought a memorandum to the Committee which I had not seen before on current monetary policy. I made some comments on it and later discussed with him the desirability of adding some positive recommendations on reducing the 40% reserve requirement, getting agreement on a series of means of payment and setting up as an objective the stabilization for the time being of the means of payment as of July. As he did not appear to take these up, I wrote them up. When his revised paper was introduced it contained some of these points. Unfortunately, Dr Toro had seen my page and insisted on reading it. H. was very upset and went and complained to the members of the Consejo individually. As it turned out, the President liked the suggestion re reserve requirements very much and the Banco de la República shortly after took action to re-establish uniform requirements. H.’s paper originally contained specific forecast that official deposits would decline by so many millions and loans to particulares [sic – individuals] by so many millions. I suggested that specific figures be omitted, which also turned out to be a fortunate move. The next difficulty was on H.’s memorandum on the probable impact of the fiscal operations of the Government on stability. He used the ordinary budget figures for 1952 which are useless for this purpose… … H. asked me if I didn’t think it a mistake to try to streamline the Colombian Government [as in Currie’s Public Administration Report] – that it probably was a good thing to have a lot of checks and balances and independent entities. He also questioned the desirability of transferring the Budget Bureau to the President’s Office on the grounds that the English system worked fine with the Budget in the Treasury… … [Torfs] saw a great deal of H. and H. told the Consejo that the [World Bank] Mission would like to meet with it. As it turned out, Torfs alone appeared with a prepared statement on “What the Bank expected the Consejo to do”...6 On September 29, Currie, evidently still very much advising the Consejo, wrote that “…I did my work on the extension of agricultural credit to Ganadería [cattle] and as usual got crossed up with Hirschman. He was perfectly prepared to take a chance on inflation for the sake of pleasing Toro”. And on October 7 he summarised discussions in the Consejo regarding a proposed decree that involved reserving 5% of banks’deposits exclusively for cattle loans, mentioning two memoranda he had submitted on the subject. It seems that Currie objected on grounds related to his well-known (e.g., 1931, 1934, 1934a) criticism of the commercial-loan or real-bills theory of central banking with its focus on credit rather than the money supply (by which short-term credits are supposedly non-inflationary, unlike long-term loans). In addition, the fungibility or fluidity of credit makes the ultimate use of “selective” and forced credits indeterminate. However, he made some proposals for offsetting inflationary dangers 6 Easterly would perhaps relish this as evidence of the World Bank’s “original sin” of tyranny. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia through modifications to banks’reserve requirements and a greater commitment to monetary control. He wrote: After [my paper] was read, Hirschman made a little speech to the effect that, of course, if we wanted to get into banking reforms, we could spend months but that he assumed that the Consejo just wanted to do something for cattle and the plan for this purpose had been all worked out. Toro came in heavily saying that he agreed 100%. Marulanda also joined in so, to my surprise, Delgado capitulated and merely said that he would like to discuss some theoretical points with me later. The others can be excused, but Hirschman knows enough to know what I am talking about and that I had the right solution7. In a subsequent memorandum, “The Work of the Consejo”, October 10, 1952, Currie listed the four memoranda that Hirschman had submitted to the Consejo in August and September: (i) on monetary policy; (ii) on fiscal policy; (iii) on “a method of securing a larger loan from the International Bank in connection with the new Airport Corporation” that, according to Currie, “contained no discussion as to whether the loan was necessary… or a priority”; and (iv) on credit for ganadería [cattle]. Currie criticised them all and contrasted the thirteen memoranda he had himself submitted since August. On Hirschman’s contribution to the Consejo’s deliberations on agricultural credit, Currie wrote acerbically: Dr. Hirschman’s memorandum on credit for ganadería proposed abandoning the Consejo’s previous proposal to modify the 40% reserve requirement and provided for (in effect) forced investment of the difference between normal reserve requirements and the 40% reserve requirements in bonds of the Caja Agraria, after stating that the principle of forced investment was highly undesirable. Meanwhile, Jacques Torfs was sent by the Bank as its adviser to the Consejo. In his first report back to Burke Knapp, 30 October 1952, he lamented that Enrique Peñalosa, a man “of great competence” [and later a very senior politician], had been “completely annexed by Dr Currie, and is therefore at odds with Hirschman”. He added that Hirschman is “absolutely despondent and seems paralyzed by the very existence of Dr Toro and Dr Currie. The members of the Council are unanimous in stating that he has not given the performance that was expected of him”. Equally revealing is a frank letter from Emilio Toro to Robert Garner Nov. 7 Currie and Hirschman had both worked at the US Fed: Currie from 1934-39, Hirschman from 1946-52. Hirschman was unhappy there and by 1951 “wanted out, desperately” (Adelman 2013: 280). Currie – more so than Hirschman – was hawkish on inflation throughout his career. He even worried in 1936 about the inflationary potential of the commercial banks’substantial accumulation of excess reserves. As the economy recovered, these would pose an inflationary danger difficult to control. Thus Currie recommended, as a precautionary measure, that reserve requirements be doubled, even as he continued to favour deficit spending meanwhile (see Sandilands 2004). And throughout his time in Colombia he agitated for a sharp separation of the functions of central banking and development banking. The primary role of the former is to control the money supply. To avoid conflict, development banking needs to rely on non-inflationary taxes or private savings. This principle is compromised when the central bank’s board is dominated by spending ministers. 28, 1952, in which he (with fellow Consejo member Jesus María Marulanda) forcibly defended Currie as a leader against Hirschman who “is a good man in his restricted field of monetary matters, but as Director of Programs, to plan the development of a country in all its aspects, he falls short and very short. He lacks broadness of concept, leadership, initiative, personality and has difficulties in expressing and getting consideration for his ideas.” Toro goes on to state that when comparing the accomplishments of Currie and Hirschman, “I feel appalled”. He also emphasised that Currie had the full support of President Roberto Urdaneta Arbaláez. Adelman does not report this except to state that Toro “seems to have taken a disliking to Hirschman’s modest sights” (Adelman 2013: 301). In his reply for the Bank to Toro, 3 December 1952, Burke Knapp (with Robert Garner’s endorsement) continued to express concern that Currie would be continuing to influence the Consejo. 4. Hirschman and Currie on development economics In June 1953, the work of the Consejo was disrupted by a military coup but carried on8. Currie retired soon after from economic consulting and worked as a full-time farmer until the return of civilian government in 1958. When Hirschman’s two-year contract ended in April 1954 he remained in Colombia as a private consultant, mainly on individual projects, until 1956, but visited Latin America frequently thereafter. In 1956 he was angling for a Rockefeller grant to set up his own private survey research centre but was turned down on the grounds that the foundation did not support profit-making ventures. Luckily, Yale came to the rescue with a one-year non-teaching fellowship that Rockefeller extended for a further year to 1958 when Yale published his influential Strategy of Economic Development. This made Hirschman famous and opened doors to other Ivy League positions, beginning with Columbia and later Harvard, Stanford and Princeton. At Columbia he had to give just one lecture a week. Adelman reports, rather poignantly, that even this light teaching load was a stomach-churning nightmare for him. One interviewee described him as a “catastrophically bad” lecturer, and (unlike Currie, who loved teaching) he mentored very few students. This contrasts with Hirschman’s amazing gift and passion for the written word and his love of good conversation. Fortunately for him, he found ways to buy himself out of teaching for the great bulk of his academic career.  Adelman is also eloquent in tracing Hirschman’s disillusion with extremist 8 Politically, Colombia had been unstable since the assassination of Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, a popular political leader in August 1948. This resulted in major riots known as the “Bogotazo”, followed by years of bloodletting between Liberals and Conservative supporters, known as “La Violencia”. During 1950-53, the President of Colombia was Laureano Gomez but in November 1951 poor health forced him to cede presidential power to Roberto Urdaneta. When Gomez attempted to resume the presidency in 1953 he was overthrown by General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia ideologies, resulting from his traumatic personal encounters with fascism in Germany, Italy and Spain that provoked its equally dictatorial Marxist antitheses. Not only in The Strategy but also in much of his subsequent work, Hirschman advocated a middle ground for what he called the optimistic “possibilism” of “reform mongering”. This partly explains his clash in Colombia with Currie over a master plan within which to prioritise individual projects. In line with Rosenstein-Rodan’s call for a “Big Push” to overcome low-level equilibrium traps and vicious circles, we have seen that Currie had proposed a coordinated programme of monetary and exchange rate stabilization together with infrastructure, social programmes and related administrative reforms. Adelman (2013: 301) characterised the focus on administrative reform as “woolly”, though we have noted that Toro and the Consejo thought differently. Currie’s proposals were all designed to integrate the country’s transport and communications network and foster greater competition, mobility and urbanisation that would thereby extend the effective size of the then highly fragmented national market. This would increase the specialization and capital intensity that Adam Smith thought pivotal to the wealth of nations, producing endogenously self-sustaining rather than self-exhausting growth9. Also, Adelman is wrong to claim that Currie, unlike Hirschman, downplayed the role of the private sector in all this. Currie stressed the need to follow the natural direction of income and price elasticities of demand by promoting the migration of labour from zero and low-productivity agriculture to higher productivity urban industry and services, as the indirect but more effective way to alleviate rural poverty. By contrast, Adelman enthusiastically notes that Hirschman dedicated his Journeys Toward Progress (1963) to Carlos Lleras Restrepo (later Colombia’s president, 1966-70) for his direct – some would say simplistic – approach to rural poverty through the setting up in 1961 of an agricultural Land Reform Institute (INCORA) designed to break up large farms, promote (costly) colonisation and extend the Green Revolution. There was little awareness that increased farm productivity for the beneficiaries would greatly intensify the competitive pressure on less favoured farmers. One risks the fallacy of composition in generalising from microeconomic case studies and Hirschman’s petites idées. Greatly increased productivity for some does not translate into similar increases in overall production. Due to relatively slow growth of demand, increased productivity for some displaces even more farmers into the ranks of the openly 9 Currie (for example 1981; 1997; see also Sandilands 2009a) would later extend the seminal ideas of his Harvard mentor Allyn Young (1928) on economic progress in which reciprocal demand is the key force that drives specialisation in its various modern guises and generates what Currie calls macroeconomic increasing returns, as distinct from microeconomic economies of scale. These increasing returns generate a “Youngian multiplier effect” that sustains growth endogenously unless offset by negative exogenous shocks, including anti-market policy mistakes. This real multiplier effect differs from and can conflict with the more familiar Keynesian multiplier which is cast in monetary terms and may or may not be exhausted in rising prices. This is explained in Currie (1983). or disguisedly unemployed, absent much more energetic urbanisation policies than Carlos Lleras supported. Similar criticisms could be levelled against Hirschman’s later enthusiasm (1983) for subsidised micro-credit and cooperatives for disguisedly unemployed tricicleros in the Dominican Republic in 1983 (Adelman 2013: 586); or, likewise (Adelman 2013: 582), for artisans in the Colombian ‘jungle’ [sic] town of Raquirá (there is no jungle at 2,200 metres) when the overcrowded market for their goods was saturated. But Hirschman rejected the notion of disguised unemployment and according to Adelman was “crestfallen” when in 1979 Arthur Lewis, rather than himself, won the Nobel prize for his model of the development of the labour-surplus economy. For, as Adelman put it: “If there was going to be a Nobel for a development economist, there would be only one. Lewis got it.” In fact Lewis shared the prize with Chicago’s Theodore Schultz for his work on the development of (inherently rational) traditional agriculture. Although Schultz was also sceptical of disguised unemployment Hirschman scorned his Chicago School “ideology” of the rational economic man – in farming as elsewhere. (Hirschman and Adelman are also scathing about the Chicago School’s role in post-Allende Chile but do not mention that Chicago was a likely reaction to Allende’s monetary excesses). So Hirschman spurned the Big Push and other master plans. 5. Hirschman and Currie on Paul Rosenstein-Rodan’s “Big Push”10 In the early 1950s Ragnar Nurkse (1953) was interpreting the Big Push as consistent with “balanced growth”, by which he meant simultaneous and coordinated promotion of all sectors. Tibor Scitovsky (1954) more helpfully defined “balance” as balance between growth of supply with growth of demand for sectors whose prospective demand elasticities differ significantly. Unlike Nurkse, he also stressed international trade opportunities11. Thus it is wrong to caricature balanced growth as calling for every sector to grow at the same pace or as denying a case for prioritizing sectors facing the greatest potential demand. There is much that Latin American countries could have done in this regard, if given better advice. For example, Currie showed how they could have done more to avoid the unnatural distortions associated with monetary mismanagement and chronic inflation without heaping blame on inevitable structural obstacles or “inherently adverse” terms-of-trade movements. Hirschman’s thesis in Strategy (1958) and later in Development Projects 10 Rosenstein-Rodan was actually involved in some of the preparatory work for the 1949 World Bank mission to Colombia (Alacevich 2009: 22) and was known personally to both Hirschman and Currie. 11 Currie (1966) criticised Nurkse and other early development economists (including those influenced by the Harrod-Domar model) for an excessive concentration on aggregate saving and investment ratios that distracted from (a) the dependence of investment on final consumer demand and (b) the very different demand potential of different sectors, including exports, under different policy scenarios. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia Observed (1967a) was that a deliberately unbalanced growth of supply and demand was to be preferred, giving little attention to its inflationary potential (see footnote 7 above). Since he believed that the scarcest resource in underdeveloped countries was “the capacity to make decisions” and that “directly productive activity” rather than “social overhead capital” was strategic, the private sector should be motivated by the tensions and opportunities that an unbalanced strategy could deliberately create (as if there were not tensions enough already, even with a planned balanced growth path). This also made him take “a far calmer” and less alarmist attitude toward the population problem than Harvey Leibenstein, who claimed that population “traps” necessitate “a huge jump to break out of them” (Hirschman 1958: 182). Most famously, there was his novel “Principle of the Hiding Hand” (Hirschman 1967a, ch.1), namely that planners should deliberately exaggerate benefits and understate costs when advising allegedly excessively risk-averse private investors to invest their money (not Hirschman’s or the planners’ money). Adelman does not question whether this might be not only bad economics but even worse morality. However, it was original – and beguiling (“even the sceptics swooned at his prose”; Adelman 2013: 654). The elaboration of this thesis, along with espousal of his “backward and forward linkages” criterion for project selection would assure him of generous funding for field work observing case studies of individual development projects that filled his notebooks with petites idées and Flaubertian and Montaignesque aphorisms. These added up to one grande idée: that big ideas are bad12. Adelman (2013: 401) highlights the “centrality of side effects” (Hirschman 1967a, ch.5) in the form of those backward and forward linkages and tensions. Thus, effectively, failure may be counted success. For example, Hirschman (1957) cautiously defended capital-intensive projects and gave his retrospective support for a controversial recent decision to accede to regional pressure groups (against the advice of Currie, the Comité de Desarrollo Económico, and even the World Bank13) in approving a highly subsidised integrated steel mill at Paz del Rio in a poor and remote region of Colombia. Hirschman saw steel as a prime example of a sector with many backward and forward linkages that could spur innovation elsewhere14. However, this is to neglect parallel negative offsets. Here these offsets were due to the poor quality of the ore, exorbitant transport and mining costs, and a ban on much cheaper imported steel. Steel-using industries, taxpayers and consumers suffered the consequences for several decades. Hirschman also neglected the consequentially lower incomes that spelled lower effective demand for all sectors of the economy. A bias in favour of very high-cost and low-quality steelmaking and against construction is in total opposition to Currie’s focus on the actual and potential elasticities of supply and demand. 12 Except perhaps for his own advocacy in the late 1940s and early 1950s, while at the Fed, of a 
United States of Europe with a common currency and its own army. See Adelman 2013: 276-80. 
13 As documented in Currie 1981, ch.12. 
14 Also cf. Hirschman 1958: 147, 204. 
But politics and regional interests prevailed and Hirschman (1957) too optimistically wrote that this project “will probably turn out to be... an effective development move compared with any program to provide such an area with plentiful social overhead capital whose capacity may go begging for many years”15. This was in line with Hirschman’s preference for “directly productive activities” (DPA) than for “social overhead capital” (SOC). He also thought that acceding to the interests of poorer regions could generate imbalances that could stimulate growth-promoting reactions elsewhere, another example of an unbalanced growth strategy that might snatch success from failure. Currie too thought that “regional balance” policies smacked too much of geographers’ propensity for “filling in spaces on a map” rather than economic efficiency, but his logic was very different from Hirschman’s. With poverty spread widely over the whole country its solution rested more with bringing underemployed rural workers to dynamic cities rather to places with much less future. By contrast, Hirschman (1958: 188) seemed lukewarm toward migration. However, Alacevich (2009: 101) reckons that Hirschman and Currie actually held convergent views. But the best example he could give was that while Currie opposed the Acerías Paz del Rio steel mill, he did favour a more modest electric furnace in the coastal city of Barranquilla to transform imported scrap metal. When politics closed off this option, he and the Comité tried to limit the damage by building the new plant at Paz del Rio incrementally, “thus linking its development to increased competence and market share”. Alacevich (2009: 101-103) continued: This would have limited the burden of its unfortunate location and allowed the business to gain strength despite this initial handicap. This reasoning was actually not too different from Hirschman’s attempt to find the “hidden rationalities” of the process of growth. Thanks to these, the economy of a sector or a country is pushed toward new paths for growth that were previously invisible or unpredictable… … The apparently irreconcilable break between Hirschman and Currie had to do with their respective frames of reference. From opposite premises, in an environment more complex and intertwined than it first appeared, they often reached similar conclusions. My contention is that disagreement was more fundamental. In a long footnote connected with the above passage Alacevich (2009: 176-77) writes: There was probably another disagreement between Currie and Hirschman. According to Krugman, Hirschman based his concept of “backward linkages” on “the idea of economies of scale at the level of the individual plant [which] translated into increasing returns at the aggregate level through pecuniary external economies” (Krugman 1993: 22). Ramesh Chandra and Roger Sandilands (2005), on the contrary, maintain that the importance of economies of scale is marginal if compared to increasing returns. Sandilands interprets Hirschman’s formulation more as a reference to technological external economies and only marginally to pecuniary 15 Hirschman mentioned, in applying for World Bank funding, that he might include the Paz del Rio case as one of his “Development Projects Observed”, but in the end he did not include it, sadly. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia external economies, which were at the centre of Currie’s analysis. Specifically, Sandilands holds that Hirschman’s “backward” and “forward linkages tend to be mainly technological (framed in an input-output relation) whereas Currie focuses on the size of potential demand… Regardless, it seems to me that the different views on what was at the basis of Hirschman’s “backward linkages” demonstrate how the theoretical debate can magnify differences that at a practical level are actually much less defined and not so far apart. Actually my disagreement is perhaps best explained with reference to a related point that Alacevich (2009: 102) makes: It is possible that disagreements arose over the suitability of labour-intensive (preferred by the [Currie] mission) or capital-intensive production (preferred by Hirschman). Hirschman’s preference was based on the principle that a labour force that was not trained for manufacturing could be more productive if the production were centred on the process (typically capital-intensive, like steelmaking) rather than on the product itself (typically labour-intensive, like construction). However, although interesting and even important, these were not major disagreements… In contrasting the steel industry with the construction sector, Hirschman was here concerned to stress the greater importance of backward linkages. Forward linkages were only significant up to the final product stage. Since a house is a final product, its construction has no forward linkages. This seems to be why Currie has written (in an unpublished manuscript, 1970, on Rosenstein-Rodan) that Hirschman fails to understand the significance of Say’s law and real demand, and why his conception of the size of the market – in terms only of linkages – is much more limited than in Adam Smith (1776) or Allyn Young (1928). If a latent demand for housing is actualised via a boost to savings that are now directed toward house-building, higher real incomes are earned in the process. These earnings, backed by real production, are then spent on (reciprocally exchanged for) the output of other sectors. These expenditures naturally generate what may be called lateral pecuniary external economies for other sectors that can now sell more food, clothing, home furnishing, etc., as well as further investments in housing itself, financed from increased savings out of the higher profits and wages earned from production for which latent final demand exists and can be actualised. As Chandra and Sandilands (2005) emphasise, following Currie, pecuniary external economies are not indicative of market failure that must be internalised through comprehensive central coordination of sectors as advocated by Rosenstein-Rodan. Rather, specific market failures and distortions associated, for example, by inadequate labour mobility and inflation prevent the full exploitation of those natural and beneficent external economies. It was on these grounds that Currie (1970) contended that Hirschman missed the main point of Rosenstein-Rodan’s advocacy of a Big Push and that his stirring up the balanced-unbalanced growth debate was an unnecessary distraction. The point was how to engineer a Big Push: (i) via a comprehensive investment programme, with stress on overall capital formation à la Nurkse and Rosenstein-Rodan, or (ii) via the selective promotion of potentially large “leading” sectors based on removing unnatural obstacles to the release of highly elastic but hitherto only latent or potential demand. Currie (1970: 17) wrote: Hirschman argues that “the advantages of a see-saw advance over ‘balanced growth’ whose every activity expands perfectly in step with every other, is that it leaves considerable scope to induced investment decisions and therefore economizes… genuine decision making” [Hirschman 1958: 63]. This is a completely false issue. The possibility of an expansion where every activity is perfectly in step with every other in any underdeveloped country (or developed!) is ludicrous. Underdeveloped countries need not be restrained from making “correct” investment decisions on the grounds of the possible disappearance of profits or because the tendency of profits to equalize would discourage further investment. It appears more likely that the greater the number of unprofitable investments, the less incentive there would be to make new investments, Moreover, the distinction between an “induced” decision to invest and genuine decision making does not exist. This, then, is Hirschman’s answer to the possibility of “the underdevelopment equilibrium”, or a too slow rate of growth. It does not exist, since developed countries experienced piecemeal industrial advances, but if it does it can be broken by inducing international lenders and local capitalists and governments to make unbalanced (“mistaken” in terms of current effective demand) investments which create disequilibria and tensions, which induce further investments to correct the mistakes, and so economizes decision making! This might be called the strategy of lurching development as the progress would somewhat resemble that made by the efforts of a drunk to recover his equilibrium and get ahead as he lurches from side to side. Unlike Hirschman, Currie (e.g., 1971; 1974; 1997) was a vigorous advocate of housing as one important potential “leading sector” (along with exports) capable of breaking the vicious circle of a self-sustaining slow growth trend and converting it to a faster trend. For this purpose he was the acknowledged “father” of a housing finance system launched in Colombia in 1972 by which the system’s liabilities (mainly personal savings) and assets (mortgages) were both indexed to inflation16. This (i) increased the real return to savers, with a big effect on the volume of savings; and (ii) lowered the “front-end loading” problem for borrowers when the nominal (but not the real) interest rate was thereby reduced. Thus both the supply and demand sides of the market were boosted. The effect on the supply of urban housing was a major influence on labour mobility, accelerating the shift of surplus rural labour to more remunerative urban jobs. All of this increased the real size and growth of the market, a vital element in the Smith-Young diagnosis of the main source of the wealth of nations through an increase in the incentive and ability to extend the division of labour. The main motive was not how labour-intensive the construction sector was. Rather, it was a question of where lay the greatest actual and potential real de16 He also campaigned for the exchange rate to be insulated from the toxic effects of inflation on net exports, to exploit more fully the repressed real foreign demand and thus convert exports into a second leading sector along with urban housing. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia mand. Construction may indeed be relatively more labour-intensive than steel, and use relatively more local than foreign inputs. But these were secondary considerations. Its positive influence on labour mobility was an added bonus. In his autobiographical recollections, “A Dissenter’s Confessions” (in Meier and Seers 1984) Hirschman was still laying especial stress on backward linkages: the steel plant in Boyacá encourages mining there. However, it also condemned users of steel to high costs and poor quality, as these “forward linkages” handicapped other industries, and increased consumer prices17. So Paz del Rio is not a good example of successful import-substituting industrialisation about which Hirschman was so optimistic. It is notable that in that autobiographical essay Hirschman admitted that his attempted confession of sins tended to end up as a confession of faith. There was no recanting of unbalanced growth, linkages theory or the Principle of the Hiding Hand! References Adelman J. (2013). Worldly Philosopher: The Odyssey of Albert O. Hirschman, Princeton, Princeton University Press. Alacevich M. (2009). The Political Economy of the World Bank: The Early Years, Stanford, Stanford University Press. Boughton J.M. and R.J. Sandilands (2003). Politics and the Attack on FDR’s Economists: From Grand Alliance to Cold War, Intelligence and National Security, 18:3 (Autumn): 73-99. Chandra R. and R.J. Sandilands (2006). The Role of Pecuniary External Economies and Economies of Scale in the Theory of Increasing Returns, Review of Political Economy, 18: 193-208. Currie L. (1931). The Decline of the Commercial Loan, Quarterly Journal of Economics 45 (August): 698-709. Currie L. (1934). The Supply and Control of Money in the United States, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. Currie L. (1934a). The Failure of Monetary Policy to Prevent the Depression of 1929-32, Journal of Political Economy, 42:2 (April): 145-77. Reprinted in E. Hamilton, H.G. Johnson and A. Rees (eds.) Landmarks in Political Economy, Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1962: 168-98. Currie L. (1961). Operación Colombia: Un Programa Nacional de Desarrollo Económico y Social, Barranquilla, Cámara Colombiana de la Construcción. Currie L. (1966). Accelerating Development: The Necessity and the Means, New York, McGraw-Hill. Currie L. (1970). The Big Push and Balanced and Unbalanced Growth. Chapter 19 of an unpublished book manuscript, held in Duke University’s Special Collections Library. Currie L. (1971). The Exchange Constraint on Development: A Partial Solution to the Problem, The Economic Journal, 81 (December): 886-903. Currie L. (1972). Plan of the Four Strategies: Guidelines, Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Bogotá, Colombia. 17 In his Strategy (p.102) he did add a caveat regarding forward linkages (without it figuring prominently), viz.: “[T]he strength of the forward stimulus is likely to be substantial, provided demand is sufficient to justify domestic production” (italics added). However, for steel, it was not. Currie L. (1974). The Leading Sector Model of Growth in Developing Countries, Journal of Economic Studies N.S. 1(1): 1-16. Currie L. (1981). The Role of EconomicAdvisers in Developing Countries, Westport: Conn, The Greenwood Press. Currie L. (1981). Allyn Young and the Development of Growth Theory, Journal of Economic Studies, 8: 52-60. Currie L. (1983). The ‘Multiplier’ in Economic Literature, Journal of Economic Studies, 10(3): 42-8. Currie L. (1997). Implications of an Endogenous Theory of Growth in Allyn Young’s Macroeconomic Concept of Increasing Returns, History of Political Economy, 29: 413-43. Easterly W. (2013). The Tyranny of Experts: Economists, Dictators, and the Forgotten Rights of the Poor, New York, Basic Books. Ellis H.S. and H.C. Wallich (eds.)(1961). Economic Development of Latin America, Macmillan, London. Hirschman A.O. (1957). Investment Policy and ‘Dualism’ in Underdeveloped Countries, American Economic Review, 47(5): 557-60. Hirschman A.O. (1958). The Strategy of Economic Development, New Haven, Yale University Press. Hirschman A.O.(1967a). Development Projects Observed, Washington DC, Brookings Institution Press. Hirschman A.O. (1967b). Review of Lauchlin Currie, Accelerating Development, American Economic Review 57(3) (June): 611-13. Hirschman A.O. (1968). Journeys Toward Progress: Studies in Economic Policy-making in Latin America, New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press. Hirschman A.O. (1971). A Bias for Hope, New Haven, Conn.,Yale University Press. Hirschman A.O (1984). A Dissenter’s Confessions, in Meier and Seers (eds.)(1984). International Bank for Reconstruction and Development [World Bank] (1950). The Basis for a Development Plan for Colombia: Report of a Mission headed by Lauchlin Currie, Washington, DC, World Bank. Krugman P. (1993). Toward a Counter-counter Revolution in Development Theory, in Annual World Bank Conference in Development Economics 1992, Washington, DC, World Bank: 15-38. Laidler D. (1993). Hawtrey, Harvard and the Origins of the Chicago Tradition, Journal of Political Economy, 101 (December): 1068-103. Laidler D. (1999). Fabricating the Keynesian Revolution, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Leeson R. (ed.)(2009). Archival Insights into the Evolution of Economics (volume 3): American Power and Policy, Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan: 105-33. Meier G. and D. Seers (eds.)(1984). Pioneers in Development, Washington, DC, The World Bank. Nurkse R. (1953). Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries, Oxford, Blackwell. Rosenstein-Rodan P.N. (1943). Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, Economic Journal, 53: 202-11. Rosenstein-Rodan P.N. (1961). Notes on the Theory of the ‘Big Push’, in Ellis and Wallich (eds.)(1961). Sandilands R.J. (1990). The Life and Political Economy of Lauchlin Currie: New Dealer, Presidential Adviser, and Development Economist, Durham, NC and London, Duke University Press. Sandilands R.J. (2004). Editor’s Introduction: New Light on Lauchlin Currie’s Monetary Economics in the New Deal and Beyond, Journal of Economic Studies, 31(3/4): 170-93. R. J. Sandilands/The 1949 World Bank Mission to Colombia Sandilands R.J. (2009). An Archival Case Study: Revisiting The Life and Political Economy of Lauchlin Currie, in Leeson (ed.)(2009): 105-33. Sandilands R.J. (2009a). Solovian and New Growth Theory from the Perspective of Allyn Young on Macroeconomic Increasing Returns, History of Political Economy, 41 (annual supplement): 285-303. Scitovsky T. (1954). Two Concepts of External Economies, Journal of Political Economy, 62 (April): 143-51. Young A.A. (1928). Increasing Returns and Economic Progress, Economic Journal, 38: 527-542. abstract The 1949 World Bank mission to Colombia, headed by Lauchlin Currie, recommended a comprehensive attack on the interlocking vicious circles of underdevelopment through a widening of domestic and international markets and reform of macroeconomic policy-making. In 1950 Currie was invited by the Colombian Government to return as adviser to a new national planning board. In 1952 Albert Hirschman was also hired as an adviser to this board. This paper discusses the disagreements between these two distinguished economists, their influence on the theory and practice of economic development in Colombia and by the World Bank, and in particular their perspectives on comprehensive program versus individual project approaches to planning. Jel Classification: B25, B30, D78, 011, 020, 054 Keywords: Currie, Hirschman, World Bank, Colombia, national economic planning. View publication stats View publication statsView publication stats 